So the tape is on, and so everything is recorded for posterity. Okay, turn the
tape off just a second. It is on now, so it is on now. So I'll start off by
asking you a little bit about your background, specifically how you grew up and
what might have influenced you to write and why science fiction particularly.
Okay. Okay. I grew up in a very literary family with an influence on technology.
My father restructured the Boeing paperwork stuff at Otis Air Force Base when we
had missiles up here in the 50s. So there was a lot of military people around my
house and high tech people, pilots, submarine guys, stuff like that. So I met a
lot of people like this very early on. and when I was seven, I started reading
science fiction, but before that, my mother was a master's in education, my
father went to Harvard, and my bedtime story is when I was three and four, well,
I'm a fairy queen. So I had a, in mythology, so I had a real good background in
not only literature, but in particular sorts of literature that ended up
translating into science fiction and fantasy later on. I read fiction
voraciously. I got a hardcover book a week with my allowance when I was in
second and third grade. Being an over-advantaged child in a public school was
very difficult for gifted children. I had really nothing to do in school. I was
finished with the year's reading in October, and I would sit. They would make me
just sit there. So I did a lot of extracurricular reading. I think the first
story I read was James Blish's Surface Tension, and I've now dated myself. I
think it was an IF magazine way way back and I read science fiction almost
exclusively until I started reading non-fiction of philosophy about 10 and 11
and then at the same time I went through the five libraries within driving
distances collection of mythology so I had all the myths of all available
countries including Asian and African by then then went into philosophy and work
backwards from the existentialists and Sardin back, bounced all the way back to
pre-Socratic thought and got into physics from there. And that got me back to
hard science through the interaction, really, of philosophy and theoretical
physics in the space-time thing and later into geopronometry, which is an area
which I really like to play with. And some of that I think shows in the book.
When in my late 20s I got involved with a physicist who because he was doing
some work in quantum mechanics was interested to see if indeed he could come up
with some reversibility. Some evidence that the arrows of time do go both ways.
There should be, if indeed this is true, on some level. even though your watch
won't put itself together after it's broken on the floor, fly up and land on
your wrist. There should be some way that we can determine that time is indeed
working both ways. It's an iteration in math. To do that, I punched a lot of
buttons because, I mean, I have car dreams, dreams that come true. It's really
unfortunate for somebody as logical as I am to be slapped in the face with
precognitive dreams and incidences of ESP. So then I went into studying that a
little bit. And we did a bunch of computer work, really, testing against
probability to see if indeed mine could be demonstrated to be affecting
probability in a randomly generated sequence of numbers. And after about a year
working on that, we proved our satisfaction that something was happening, and it
seemed to be happening most strongly and most consistently in people who were in
some way or form connected with nonverbal arts. Musicians, artists, people who
paint as opposed to all sorts of artists. But people who are not logically tied
down in some way to semantics.
Later on, we went and tried, on the basis of that, research to get a National
Science Foundation grant to study it. But it was right about the time they were
trying to throw the parapsychologist out of the National Science Foundation.
Consequently, we did not get the grant and didn't carry it on any further. Does
that answer your question? That's a good start. Okay. You have this remarkable
background then in reading all sorts of philosophy and that sort of thing and
you are interested in science. Are you a logical kind of left hemisphere person?
Yeah, most determinedly. The other stuff bothers me very much. Because I like to
be able to figure things out, and because most things fall to logic in the end,
the things that are illogical tend to be what I concentrate on. Because after
one solves what's solvable, what remains the question? The things that one can't
determine. And that throws you back to the nature, really, of time and what
consciousness is. the role of the observer in not only the modern world, but
maybe in the actual creation of what we see as the rational and physical world
around us. So that's what I'm working with, struggling to deal with, maybe, in
the fiction. Okay. This is, as an aside, but as I mentioned on the phone the
other night, I make my living as a scientist, but as a layman, I'm very
interested in cosmology and quantum mechanics and that sort of thing. So I think
that's probably why your writing appeals to me so much because you investigate
some of these things that I can't verbalize nearly as well as another site is a
book that you might be familiar with From Being to Becoming by Ilya Prigogini I
think you pronounce it yes that's how you pronounce it he's one of my heroes
have you seen that book I have seen the book I do not have a copy of it his area
is really your area chemistry and thermodynamics and he's dealing in that book
with the kind of questions that also interests you, I think it would be nice for
you to take a look at. Okay, I appreciate the suggestion. He won the Nobel in, I
think, 77, yeah. Plus he comes to Austin. He's part-time at UT Austin, too, so
it's not that far away. In it, he's really coming to terms with the same kinds
of problems. I mean, are there determinable instances? Is it one flow of time?
Why, indeed, isn't this happening? Why don't we see reversibility in nature? And
almost calling for a restructure of the questions, which is nice. Very bright,
very bright, darn. Oh, yeah, of course. His main bag is non-equilibrium
thermodynamics, where you get, oh, I guess there's a big argument that the
creationists can throw up that life cannot have evolved spontaneously because
entropy makes it go the other way. you tend towards disorder, and he has refuted
that quite nicely. I've read quite a few of those papers. So, okay, I guess I
ought to stick to them. Let's see. Well, part of my kick in this is this kind of
stuff. Of course, the author on the other end might not want to stay forever,
so. I don't mind it. Wheeler, too, you would like. Oh, yeah, I'm very familiar.
I've read a lot of his stuff. I really like that. The universe ordered itself as
it did in the initial instance in order to produce physicists. I think it's just
wonderful. Yeah. Let's see, who is it? The anthropomorphic principle. Prophecy
principle, right. Yeah, right. That's quite interesting. And then the many
worlds. One more clue, let's see. The DeWitt model, it's called the many worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics. It's quite interesting. You are probably
familiar with it. Yeah, I was thinking of fooling around with that next time.
It's just awful hard to use a structure like that in a book because it's going
to not look like a novel. It's going to look like lots of parts of a novel.
Right, especially since quantum mechanics says that the many worlds could not
communicate amongst each other, but maybe you can find a way to get around that,
and then it would be quite interesting. We would be writing really parallel
structures, but it would be fun to do. That's what I think science fiction
should do, is deal with the new concepts rather than just older, rehashed
science fictional concepts because the really creative stuff is starting to
happen now because people are asking much more interesting questions than
scientists' level. In the Patchen Review article, the second one where you
signed your name, you talked about scientific speculation and that perhaps it's
not... that even the science fiction writers have grown conservative about
speculating about science. That was written a couple of years ago. I guess, do
you still feel pretty strongly about that? Yeah, I'm afraid that I do. Because
if not, because of the way I work and the amount of concentration and area it
takes, I mean, right now, I just got finished with mycotoxins and the whole
Afghanistan thing, biochemical warfare, and surveillance stuff. So I've been
reading, that's what I've been reading for the last year, really the technology
that is here now in depth. So if somebody, what happens is the fiction reading
stuff is what I don't get to read when I'm researching a subject is what other
people are writing because it's so peripheral to what I'm doing. So if somebody
in the last couple years has come along in science fiction who's taking risks
and taking shots and using the new data that's coming in, then I don't know
about it. But, as of two years ago, when I was really conversant with who was
writing and what they were writing, it seemed to me that they were almost
ignorant of anything that one would consider an advance in the theory of science
that had happened in the last 20 years. And I think that's really a shame
because that's what science fiction is supposed to do. We have a brighter
audience. They're at an age where they're deciding what they're going to do a
lot of the time for a living. They're comfortable with technology and they're
adventurous. And to not give a questioning mind something interesting to chew
on, which is what I found was nice about science fiction when I first started
reading it, is a shame. To some extent, the problem is in the editor's
publishers, but they can't buy a better book than you send them. So if people
are sending them garbage, which then garbage is all they can buy. I mean garbage
from a conceptual point of view, there's plenty of people in science fiction
that can write, but there's very few of them that are writing about anything
interesting. And what I try to do always is to put in, if not leading edge
stuff, new stuff, make the hard stuff simple, at least science that is still
viable as a speculation. I really like Twisters. I just love Ken Rose and the
whole Twister Theory thing. That makes great sense to me. And I wanted to give
people some exposure to it. But there's always a new thought. There's a new
permutation. Something more interesting. I was complaining in that about
tachyons, because I think tachyons are a dead issue. And considering, especially
the source, that the writer, who is certainly aware of more modern and
interesting concepts than tachyons, could have done better. And if the best of
the writers that we have, in the sense of the most technologically literate,
aren't going to do it, then nobody's going to do it and the level will go down
and down, as it's been going down in all fiction. It's a conservative market.
They want to buy what they can sell. They're absolutely sure that everybody that
buys these books is eight years old, and I know that they're not. So I write for
my ideal audience, which is intelligent and adventurous. okay I think what I'm
going to do now okay I'll go back up to and we'll start on Silistra this is yes
oh yes great I keep debating if I start backwards because I had a question
that's in from cruiser dreams that has the same thing to do with that but man
let's I'll go I'll do it chronologically it'll be easier okay reportedly or it
says in the back of the first Silistra book that you had written one short story
before you wrote The High Couch of Silistra. So how did you go from writing one
short story to a very successful science fantasy novel? Okay. Actually, I didn't
even write it beforehand. I wrote this tiny short story called An Antidreaming,
and I wrote it between, I guess, between Wind from the Abyss and the Golden
Sword just to peg the idea and open the door so I can get back into that thing
that I saw. I tend to see a story, the concepts are one thing. You put the
concepts in and they gestate, and then I don't have to look around for a story.
I mean, I see characters. I don't sit down there to write until I see something.
And it's almost like you're looking into a telescope and the story is at the
other end, so there's a degree of automatic writing in it. But I always knew I
was going to write. you know you win a poetry contest in first grade and you
always get an A on the essay question there are certain signs I don't think you
can learn to write I think you're either a writer or you're not you can learn to
be an author someone who writes just enough to be able to go around and talk
about their books and be a big shot or a literary snob but a person who likes is
willing to sit in a room and spend most of their time in a non-existent world
and make very good friends with a typewriter or a word processor That's
something that you have to be born with the drive and the obsession to do. I did
a lot of life research before I sat down to write anything because I felt that
you have to have something to say. And having survived my research, when we
moved to a quiet place and I actually had the time and I found that I did have a
specific idea, I sat down and wrote to Lister And I didn't do any warm-up. That
is the first thing I ever wrote for sale. And it's also the first draft of the
first thing I ever wrote. It never occurred to me that a story could go any way
but the original way. So I wrote it and I typed it up and it sat around for a
year because I didn't know where to send it. And then I sent it out. And the
agent said, well, you know, he thought he could sell it. And I said, fine,
because I wrote two more in the meantime. And indeed he did sell them. So I did
no warm-up. But I did wait. I didn't try until I knew I could do it. not a big
one for preparation.
The only preparation I think you can do for writing is reading. And over the
years I've done plenty of reading, but the other thing you should need to do if
you're going to write about the stuff of life, the human element is to
experience some of the human element. And I spent quite a bit of time in New
York and underground and doing dangerous, dicey things. And every time something
would be exceedingly difficult, like when I was looking down the wrong end of
the gun or tied up in my apartment in New York by a hostile forest, I would
think, well, I can use this in my book. And it got me through a lot of very
difficult situations, just thinking that if I could just get through this,
eventually I was going to have plenty of material for a book. And what I ended
up doing was writing for a living.
you uh wrote using a first person point of view except for a couple of delcretz
sequences in the carnelian throne and it's kind of hard to write first person
how did you decide to do that i think it was in that case it was easier but with
Silistra um there's a one has to be a little bit messianic to do a book like
that i really was concerned that when I got into the very abstract stuff that I
must have some way to take them with me. I wanted them to experience this stuff
as closely and as possible because of the kinds of things that I was talking
about, both the philosophical things and the genetic experience that I wanted to
give them. The sufficient characters are almost like walking genes. At the time
I was quite taken with Edmund Wilson in sociobiology. I still think some of the
things that are valid although they've spun it out past the point where I can
agree with them now. So first person was the way to go with that book. As I said
I see a story. I don't have to manufacture the story. Once I have a character or
a group of characters I can just let it go. By then the work is done and I just
write it and I write it in deep immersion and stay home a lot and don't cook
dinner. The cats scream at me. So first-person for that was easier to get you
really inside the characters and prepared for things like the multiple world
stuff that came at the end of that first book later on. And it was a little bit
more of a discipline to write first-person because one doesn't do it in essay
class, certainly not in college. It just was the way that book wanted to be
written. I don't tend to pay too much attention to the style that I'm writing
because I want to make the style fit the piece. So the style develops itself in
accordance with the concepts that I want to work with. Sometimes I'll get a very
dense style like in Earth Dreams was dense.
because the concepts were difficult. I knew where I was going to deal with those
concepts. I needed a style where when I started talking, technically, it
wouldn't be too great a jerk, too different from the stuff that was going on
before it. Also, there I was trying to blend the pure logic of hard science with
the absolute other side of the brain, ill logic of magic, and I needed a way to
do it. So the styles develop out of that. And each group of things I do tends to
be very different stylistically from the last. Silistra is very different from
the Kerrion stuff, which is very different from the sanctuary stuff, which is
different. I did a historical with Cal Watkins at Harvard and a Hittite king,
which I sold and then reverted him in the process of selling again. And in that
book, we had translated stuff that had never been seen in English before,
Acadian, and lots of old Hittite. And that style was determined by the fact that
I knew I was going to be using big chunks of text and I wanted to use it as it
transliterated rather than modernizing the translation. So that again was first
person because all the text we had was first person. So I let the story
determine the style rather. I don't really choose it. A lot of times I don't
think I choose the stories either. When I'm on the rebound from the amount of
hard mathematical homework that I do, I tell myself if the story takes me
because otherwise why should I have to work so hard? Okay. The set,
Silistra, the Planet, it's exceedingly complex. You've got all these
relationships, you've got all these politics, inter-world politics, intra-world
politics, you've got a lot of jargon, at the end you have a dictionary. Lee
Killough said when she writes books, she writes a world book, just describing
everything about the world which is often longer than the novel that she writes
from it. Did you lay down this world in your head and think it through, or did
this just come to you as you were writing it, because it's so damn complex?
Okay, I have a very good memory, an edific memory. I can remember everything
that I do. And I can also remember most of what I read, you know, page number
and how it looks on the page.
the glossary and the dictionary and the end paper matter all that stuff was done
after high touch was sold at the publisher's request i didn't have that in the
original manuscript at all what i had and what i always have is um a manila
folder that i keep the manuscript in and where i jot down notes as to what i
have done so in other words as i as i made up the words the language i'd write
down the new words on the manila envelope i don't like to take a lot of notes
because i'll lose them and i just keep it all in my head and i better be damn
sure that i remember what's in there so i'm very careful about that but no i
don't do anything like that as i tell you it's a very the actual writing for me
is a very visceral experience so much as something you know sometimes under your
pseudonym i do uh and now time stuff you know hear stuff's in there i mean if i
have to stop to get an air and a sectional you know an air map of a particular
place to find out what the route would be then that'll pull me out of it or you
know how much it costs a particular hotel or what kind of ammunition would be
right for this gun or that gun then i have to stop and go and get the data but
where it's all made up all i have to do is be consistent with myself and logical
within the frame so i keep it in my head where it belongs That way I find if I
write a lot of stuff first, then I find that I'm in danger of not explaining it
well enough to the reader because I already know it so well that I might leave
out something crucial. And this way, as I develop it, you get the same thing
that I get. And if it's logical to me, then it's going to be logical to you. It
makes sense to me, and it's there in developmental structures. I'm not dumping a
whole bunch of stuff on them and dig dense chunks that I had thought of
previously and I find that it's better for me not to do a lot of that sort of
pre-preparation. The pre-preparation that I do is on a technical level. And as
far as plot structure and writing structure, I just do it. I just sit there and
by God, I'm going to sit there until I get something. And so it's easier to
write the book than face a blank piece of paper for nine hours. This work turned
out to be a tetralogy. Is that what you intended when you started it? Or is that
just how the publisher broke it down? Okay. I did the first one. And then I
realized that I wanted to do some more. And I broadened the structure in my mind
to see where it would go. And at the end of the book, you look, and you see,
well, is there more book or is there not book? Sometimes you really get the
feeling that the book is over, especially in a case if the main character dies,
then your book's over. That'll do it every time. But eventually I think that'll
be six, although I don't feel that it's particularly unfinished, but I know that
I have material for two more, and it's a matter of I'm going to, I think, revert
them from ban him, so I have to find another home for them before I even
consider the other two. And I've been toying with the idea of doing two more. I
sold them in France and Italy. So they're coming out there, And I think they're
all out of print at this moment. And either we'll revert them or they'll do
another round of Silistra with hopefully less horrible covers than those. And
we'll see what we can do. But it should be three and three is really what I'm
after was the first three as a group. And the fourth one opens up something else
to wish there will be two more. And I don't really want to talk about what
happens because it's not quite as much fun. The other two will be a little more
serious, in a sense, than the others because the characters have matured and
their problems are greater, more difficult, and in a sense, more technical. I
stopped there because that was, A, a good place to stop, and, B, because I
needed to do a little more homework in those areas. I've done that homework now,
and I know where I can take it logically, morally, philosophically. but I really
didn't right then. The other problem was if you write one thing too long, you
seem to think you're going to wake up there. I didn't want to wake up there.
It's a nice place to visit, but I don't want to live there. Certain parts of it
might be a nice place to visit. Yeah. Okay, I'm glad I asked that question
because when I read it, the Carnelian Throne seemed to me a lot different, and
I didn't know if that was my imagination or... No, it was the start of something
else. But it's reasonably complete, I think, as it is. But it's definitely, the
form is different and the structure of the book itself is different, the split
perspectives and stuff. I mean, it wasn't meant to be just a continuation of the
others. Okay, so in a succinct statement then, yes, there will be a couple of
sequels to the Carnelian Throne. Really, there will be a couple of that. And the
mature characters dealing with the skills that they've gained, I think it's
worth a shot. what were you uh overall trying to say in the Silistra series if
anything um i was actually trying to come to terms with the fact that logically
um and mathematically i couldn't come to terms with uh the incidences of esp
that i experienced in my own life and uh some of the more tenuous philosophical
intuitions i was having that i I just couldn't state. There's no other way
really to state those concepts on one level. The relationship of mind to
probability, our connection to time, whether we indeed are co-creators in some
sense of the universe in which we're living and we're making a future in the
past at once. Sometimes in particle physics, I begin to wonder if the universe
isn't just giving us whatever particle we choose to dream up. As soon as we
think it up, then it comes into being. because we seem to be going further and
further down and every time we go down another level, I mean, the quarks split
up into little quarks and it's just, it's endless. And a lot of times you could
come up with a good mathematical reason for something, then maybe the universe
is convinced and it produces it. I have no idea of whether that's going to turn
out to be what it is. But if indeed it is, if the anthropophic principle is
anywhere near valid, that it is something like that happening, that we are, in a
sense, central to creation, which would be nice. I mean, it's good to me. On
another level, I wanted to talk about genetic predispositions. Very bright
people have a particular problem with both human relationships and sexuality,
and I wanted to talk about that, because no matter how intelligent and logical
you are, at a certain point, you have to deal with what is your genetic
conditioning, and you really get a snoot full of it in a sex act. A person who
is intelligent and monitors what's happening to them as they become aroused
really realizes that there is a different and much more primal person inside
each of us. And I had at that time begun to despair of nurture having anything
to do at all with human behavior, thinking that it was almost everything we do
seemed to me at that point to be genetically prompted. What Ed Wilson said, that
the urge to creativity might be inextricably linked to the desire to own and
dominate. And that's one of the central themes there. I'm rather, I was sort of
born post-liberated. I was the guy. I was the oldest child, and I was very
intelligent, and I was expected to do all the things that any young man was
supposed to do. So I had come to grips with being a post-liberated female, and
these people were trying to get to where I started out in agony, these women's
libbers not realizing what they were letting themselves in for. I also wanted to
talk about that. One does have to live in a world with males and females and
reproduce and be comfortable with the opposite sex, if not with one's own sex.
If I had to have a choice with whom I'm comfortable, and as my life has worked
out, it's been a real choice. I tend to have a lot of men's friends. And my
concerns tend to be mostly those of my work, and that brings me into contact
with many more men than women. and the Estri persona is a persona that is in
no way less than wholly female while being very intelligent and reasonably
comfortable with that balance. It was an injection at that time that I was
putting into consciousness to sort of inoculate people against extremes of the
female liberation movement. It was that level. And then there was just the fun
of the biology telling the story. Okay, the central scientific aspect of it to
me was the sorting, the Hesting, which reminded me of a participatory universe,
as you've alluded to, that we can sort through the possibilities and pick the
one we want. And that seemed to be grounded in some modern physics. Oh, yeah,
really? Well, what's the research that we did on it? I managed to pull scores
over a year of testing. My average was 100,000 of one against beating the
machine. So something was obviously happening. Since I had my laboratory, if
it's happening in me, it's certainly happening in everybody else. The only way
you can know the universe is through yourself. There was plenty of math to pick
it up. the participatory universe concept as far as I then knew did not yet
exist as a formulated concept but some precursors had. You can go way back to
the animus presocratic thought and get information of that sort of free will
working in concert with what would be considered the gods in Zeno stuff. and the
math there and what I was feeling about the math there I wanted to do totally in
English and that's why I divorced the culture so completely from anything that
we might know so that I could bring people to it who had no idea that that was
physics who had no idea that it was a scientific basis involved and have an have
an experiential reality to just really experience the physics of it and see how
they felt about it Because to some degree, I think all of us must have sort of a
willing conspiracy to not be aware of the degree to which we're creating what's
going on around us. And if that's so, it would be nice that we became aware of
it so that we could create things that were a little more to our liking. The...
...we're here to talk about these things in mathematical terms than it is to
talk about them. We were here to do the same thing. It sounds like you're
pushing God or fate or any one of a number of terms that are highly out of
fashion right now, certainly with logical minds. But that's where you end up. If
you go all the way to the end of the theoretical physics, you've either got
frozen passage, which I don't like, or you've got this, whatever it is. And now
we have a word for it, anthropos principled, participatory universe. And it's
nice that we have the terminology, but at the time when it's writing notes, the
terminology didn't exist just the experience in some people's research and i had
read a lot of other people's similar research and if one likes quantum mechanics
at all something like that has to be happening you can't have um an arrow of
time which goes both ways and not have some kind of print through in order for
time to be able to do that you have to be getting some feedback from somewhere
so i just put it in there in such a way that they could be comfortable with it
And they were so comfortable with it, and it sounded so little like science that
three of them came out as fantasy. So he didn't win. I'll make a comment, and
then you essentially answered my next question about whether it's fantasy or
science fiction. But the first time I ran into a participatory universe in one
form, I think, was, you know, you're familiar with the Schroedinger's Cat
paradox. And Eugene Wigner said that maybe a conscious signal makes one of the
state vectors collapse one way or the other, and that's kind of interesting.
Okay, was it fantasy or science fiction? Because it seemed science fiction to
me, but my goodness, it said on the outside, fantasy. All right. And what's the
difference? Well, there's a difference. I think it's a conceptual difference.
I'm writing pure fantasy in the sanctuary, but it's very historical fantasy. The
difference in that particular case was that Frederik Pohl, who was my first
editor and who knew what was science fiction, left. And the other, I guess,
operative difference was that at the point in time when they came out, they
could get a bigger print run if they called it fantasy. So it was an editorial
difference. rather than a real difference. But those covers did not help me, in
the least, get those books to the kind of people that I thought should be
reading them. And between that and the fantasy, I didn't realize, because I was
never a fan in the sense of someone who was hooked into the community, that
there was this great dichotomy and hostility between the science fiction people
and the fantasy people and that hardly anyone read both. There was almost no
converse between the two. and having an open mind as part of science and dealing
with unsolved problems and questions is just as important as showing that you
indeed do understand this or that particular principle which seems right now to
be valid until next week it turns out that well it just was fudge factor so I
don't know if there's a difference for me unfortunately fantasy right now seems
to be where the writers so that they don't do any homework and don't really
understand either this world or the principles on which fantasy was originally
based, the Homeric tradition and a good sense of history and honor and all those
nice things that we don't talk about too much anymore. And science fiction is
where people write who at least have a willingness to pay some lip service to a
logical mind. And fantasy used to be a lot better when most people were writing
it. But right now, there's a lot of very mediocre writers writing, you know,
good and evil fantasy or warmed-over Christian mythology, which is not, to me,
what fantasy is about. I love Conan, you know, original, the Howard stuff and
all the real old stuff and Homer and Hesiod. And that, to me, is good fantasy.
Science fiction, when it's good, it's great.
But the problem exists in science fiction in a different form where the young
writers who don't really have a good conceptual basis in science fiction use
what I call nuts and bolts, which is just data that they can get from
Encyclopedia as their science and have a little trick ending in which some
scientific principle is invoked to resolve the plot. But for me, good science
fiction has the science as an integral part of the development of the story, and
you couldn't have the story without the scientific principle or the theoretical
questions that you're basing it on. In other words, if you can take the science
out of it and you've still got a story, then you shouldn't have science fiction.
It should be something else. TV, something like that. But science fiction should
have... almost the science or the theory or the world or whatever you want to
call it, the structure that you're making. It adds the central character. And
that's what it does. When it does it best, it frees the minds and allows people
to come away with lots of good questions that they can think about rather than
providing bad answers, which indeed you have a very limited lifespan that we've
all seen. Okay, before we leave Silistra, I want to ask a couple of questions
about Estri. She starts off as a, what, a courtesan? Is that the proper word?
Yeah, I think that was it. The books, well, the first three anyway, to me, were
just this continual rite of passage where she gets up to the god class. Does
this in any way reflect the way you went through the post-feminism thing or
what? Do you make it to the god class? Not yet, huh? Not yet, no. I don't know.
The character had to be consistent with what she was, right? The biological
nature of the Silistras were such that once I had laid out the structure in the
first one, I had to keep it going. But I am not my book. The heroine, the female
lead in which she is a lead and the dream dancer thing is really polar opposite
of Estri I was a sexual athlete from 15 to 19 till I found my mate and then I
settled right down but I wasn't trying to give a course in how to do it but I
was trying to discuss ways that males and females could relate to each other
given the structure where everyone at Silistra is concerned with genetic goals
and their concerns are pretty much replication in power that's what they're
concerned with and that is the basis of most human behavior it's just that we
spend a lot of time not looking at the degree to which it affects our decision
making on on more and more rarified levels it's nice to remember once in a while
I like to look back at those books and remember that at one point I was that
well grounded in reality that I didn't take it too far to the abstract there and
that it stayed pretty much where I put it the character was slow learning in a
sense but I think if you consider the lifespans involved with those people
everything would have had to have been slowed down because if you You're just,
you know, coming into your adulthood at 300. That meant you were probably a
child for about 110 years. That's an awful long time for toilet training. So
everything was slowed down with them. And I tried to keep the balance that was
inherent in the culture. As I say, after a certain point, the story just goes.
And I don't want to be an editor to the characters. And when they start telling
me what they're going to do, I had Sereth's character at one point, I had
gone to a lot of trouble to put that character where I thought he should be,
doing what I thought he should be doing, and the character got out of story mode
and sort of crossed his mental arms and said, well, I wouldn't do that. And we
had a discussion, I stopped writing, and I had a sort of a split mental
discussion with this character for a couple weeks about what he should want and
what he should be. And when that happens, you go with it because you get lucky.
That doesn't always happen in the book. Sometimes you really are controlling a
great deal of how it resolved and if a character wants to take on a life of his
own and discuss it with you I believe it was Dostoevsky said that he was
tyrannical with his characters Lee Carey says that he makes deals with them he
says well if you'll just stay in the background for this book I'll give you one
of your own next time I've done that too I've made deals with characters they
just remain small in this book I'll move them over you know give them another
life and another world and when you have that you're very lucky I know people
never get that and think that the people, I can't risk telling you about this
because I know authors who think that writers that speak this way are lying or
crazy or both. But it does happen, and when it happens, those of us that it
happens too are damn glad to get it. Okay, the engineer says we better flip our
tape. Do you want to take a little break or anything while we do it? You're
doing great, yes.